We're now recording and we're talking to Professor Heather Jackson in Toronto.
And as I indicated in that last email that I sent, why not enter a conversation with that comment of yours?
The problem I continue to struggle with has to do with the historical value of marginalia.
which may seem to reveal a lot, but have distinct limitations and need to be handled with care, and the meaning of history of reading, which for some people can be concerned with only who read what, but for others must have a psychological dimension.
That's a fabulous, I think, way to enter the conversation.
I wonder if you could just kind of pick up on that, and then maybe I could ask you to expand in certain areas, and then we can take it from there, if that's okay.
Sure.
Well, there are two questions there, of course.
One about the historical value of marginalia and the other one about the meaning of history of reading.
Historical value of marginalia because it seems to me that our preconceptions get in the way of the way that we interpret reader's notes made in the past.
So people tend to assume that...
When we talk to our books, we're talking to our books, or we're talking to ourselves, and we're just, in an unmediated way, expressing ourselves.
Whereas, as a lot of the examples in my marginalia book indicate, it's usually more complicated than that.
When I go around and get a chance to talk to people about writing notes in books, it's usually a really wonderful experience because people get very confessional.
They're interested, of course, in other people's notes in books because either they are quoted writing books themselves, although they've generally been told they shouldn't do it, or they really can't stand the sight of marginalia, and either way,
to discover that writing in books has a long tradition and that there are some good reasons for doing it, is a revelation to them and encourages them to tell their own stories.
But what I think happens is that because we assume that when we write in our books, it's private and feels spontaneous to us.
is uninhibited, that it was always like that.
There's almost a paradox there, isn't it?
On the one hand, I can see where it would be kind of like a diary, or a journal, where you are more or less writing for yourself without necessarily having an expectation that someone else will see it.
But when you are writing on the pages of a printed book, especially if the book is going to survive, there must be some
implicit understanding that someone is going to come across this at some point.
Do you think?
Yes, I think that certainly people, readers in the past were aware of that.
I think what's happened is that people have forgotten that.
Many people, not all people.
But many people really approach their books as consumers and look on them as disposable, pretty much disposable things which they can use as they choose, and then they don't think further than that.
Although it's certainly true that books do survive and that it's more likely than not that somebody else will survive.
find their notes one day.
I did interrupt.
No, that's okay.
I wanted you to address yourself also to the concept of the history of reading, which you say for some people can be concerned that only who read what, but for others must have a psychological dimension.
I think you were kind of addressing that in a way as well, but just so we don't forget that before we move on.
No.
It's only with the first question, only that
I think that our preconceptions about the privacy, the solitariness and the privacy of the reading experience and therefore the uninhibited nature of marginalia is a false conception because it hasn't always been like that.
And so when we get notes from the past, we really want to consider under what conditions they were written, not only
the personal conditions of the reader, but also the social conditions of the time.
You know, the taken-for-granted conventions, assumptions, even attitudes of the time.
There was a statement that you made earlier, when we talk to our books.
I love that, by the way.
And is it a dialogue, in your view?
No.
We talk to them, but they don't necessarily talk back, right?
Yeah, that's right.
So it's not a dialogue.
Although someone like Petrarch, who wrote these letters to these dead authors, may have taken it to the next level, I guess.
Yes, and Erasmus talked about it.
There's a long literature of people thinking about and talking about their books as friends, companions.
And obviously they're ideal companions because they don't talk back.
But sometimes readers, in the past anyway...
I think they still do it.
In fact, imagine that they're hearing the voice of the author in the words of the book and do talk to it.
It always seems to me a little bit like heckling, though.
You find now, and not to get off track, but...
I know where it took me years to establish a website at the behest of my publisher.
I thought, fine, I'll do it.
But, you know, now where you give them an address where they can contact you, it's amazing the people who... I love to hear from some of them because I have interesting questions, but others are just...
just trying to make contact and ask some of the most inane questions.
But you almost have this new dimension here where the reader can now engage the writer beyond the hardcovers of the book.
Do you answer?
I answer them all, yeah.
I do.
Why not?
I invited it by putting up the website and saying, Nick, you're gently mad.
And I actually got a wonderful note from a woman
Two days ago, I'm now writing a column for this startup magazine called Fine Books and Collections, and I had a quote in there by Larry Lawrence Clark Powell.
He's always driven by the trinity of bookseller, librarian, and collector.
He said, gee, where did you get this quote?
I know you used it in Patience and Fortitude.
You cite it, but it's not in the bibliography.
This is three years after the book came out.
It had already been collected in paperback, and I said, oh, I've got it in there.
She's right, you know.
Well, you know, they're reading you, and they're reading your footnotes, and I wrote her back and thanked her, and I said, oops, but I wish you'd told me this two years ago when I could have gotten it into the first paperback edition, but we'll get it in the next one.
Right.
Anyway, I'm sorry to go off track on that, but you mentioned this long tradition of great readers, and I guess Erasmus certainly would be one of the greatest of all time, who talk about... How did you put it?
He describes his... It's in one of his letters.
It's a wonderful passage.
He is writing to a friend about...
His best friends are the ones whom he can talk to without fear of being criticized and so on and so forth.
And then it's a little joke because he says he will by now have realized that what I'm talking about is my books.
Yeah.
Kind of like the Machiavelli quote, too, where he repairs to his only friends are the books when he puts on his best clothes and he goes in and he... Where's that?
Um...
It's one of his letters, in fact.
It's a famous letter.
In fact, I have it in... I'll email it to you if you'd like.
It's a wonderful quote.
Tony Grafton has used it in one of his...
one of his essays, but it's a wonderful quote.
I think I use it in Patience and Fortitude, I'm not sure.
Anyway, it's a great, great, great quote.
I guess this started, obviously, this started for you with the work on Coleridge.
And had you been interested prior to that?
No.
It was really, Coleridge and Marginalia are really extraordinary, but
It was getting down close to them and then beginning to wonder about why I was doing this.
You know, why was a modern scholarly edition spending six volumes, 6,000 pages, god knows how much money, on notes in the margins of books?
Of course, I faced incredulity of anybody, particularly in the real world, after what I was doing.
I was editing somebody's notes in the margins of books.
just asking myself why I was doing this and how his notes in books had come to be so, well, it was just conceived as part of his work, you know, part of his canonical work, to deserve that kind of attention.
And that got me started thinking about that whole process.
But it does also go back.
I mean, there were, before Coleridge's time, some marginalia were published.
Not usually under a name, exactly.
And there were the collections.
These, I think, are really fascinating things that nobody has done anything with.
The things called ANAs.
How do you spell it?
A-N-A.
So it's Leibniziana and Erasmiana and Plonsoniana and so on.
The casual remarks of learned men.
But it also got extended.
I think it was a French genre, which in the late 18th century became very popular in England.
Mrs. Piazzi's library is full of them, with scores of them.
So I think that there was some interest in the off-the-cuff, off-the-record remarks.
Martin's a book for one of the places where you have those.
But I think Coleridge really is, as you suggest, in a class by himself where his marginality, and not only does he coin the word...
But it's regarded as part of his canon.
I mean, I wonder how many others you could say that about.
Well, there are some.
And it's partly because of him.
But in his lifetime, some of Byron's notes and books were picked up, for instance.
People published thrifts.
And I thought for a long time that Kildred's marginalia were really in a class by themselves, but...
Now that I've done a lot more reading of this kind of material, I think that he's doing something very ordinary in a rather spectacular way.
I love that, yeah.
But things really got me going.
This is a...
The story that I told in an article, which was the first article that I wrote about marginalia, the phenomenon, really was a note that I found, a student's note that I found in a book in the library stacks here.
It was a rude note.
And you had that in the book, I think, right?
Did I?
I'm not sure, because if not, I'd like to get the essay.
I don't think so.
Okay.
No, I don't think I used it in the book.
The article is probably listed in the bibliography for the book, but I'll tell you the story very briefly.
It was a student note in an article by Jeffrey Hartman about, with this poem, Yew Trees.
Y-E-W, Yew Trees.
And Hartman goes on and on about you and the sound you in the poem and the way that every time the sound you, as in universal, for instance, comes up, we hear this
It echoes the subject from the title of the poem, The Youth Seed.
And the student obviously got tired of this meticulous analysis of sound patterns in the poem and wrote sarcastic notes in the margin like, long-lived, a professor of English.
And eventually Hartman says about it.
In the word united, at the end of the poem, we hear again this echo of the beauties, and the student wrote in the margins, fuck you, Y-E-W.
And I thought I was so clever.
So, you know, I've got to use... Well, you use it in the essay, right?
I use it.
I'm such a prude, you know, as much as I love this story.
I get to use that word in any of my books.
And I suppose, here I am in the 21st century, you know, an old naval officer, you know, I should...
totally fixed skin to these things, but that's wonderful, isn't it?
And so was this one of these epiphanous moments for you?
It was.
I thought, oh, this is really neat, and it's really funny, and I've got to use it, and so that means I can't just write a psychology's marginalia.
I have to write about other people's marginalia as well.
Oh, that's wonderful.
And who are students can have thought
would ever read that.
What drove the student to do it?
And what's also kind of cool, too, is that you don't know who the student is.
It's a voice.
Right?
Yeah.
Am I correct?
And then that almost kind of brings in a parallel way your discussion of this contemporary reader of Johnson, Scriblerius, I think.
Yes, Scribler.
Yes, Full Grevel.
Did you ever figure out who that person is?
Is that in the book?
Did I miss that?
Yes, it's there.
Okay, great.
How did you figure that out?
It was probably quite a lot of detective work.
It was probably that he gave himself away in the notes, so if you read them carefully, there's a certain amount of internal evidence, and you just follow that up.
There's no doubt about it.
That's wonderful, isn't it?
That is communing with a reader, another reader.
It's almost a secondary.
The text is the text, but here's someone annotating the book, so to speak, and giving evidence as to who the individual is, and then
A reader 200 years later is able to go and crack the code a little bit.
But the reason you brought it up, I think, is that Scribler has presented himself pseudonymously.
That's right.
He concealed his identity, or he tried to conceal his identity.
And that nowadays, I think that's the thing, that we think that if our books, if it occurs to us at all, we think that our books are just going to go anonymously.
like the student's note in the library stacks.
Nobody's going to know who wrote it.
And that wasn't the case when people wrote in their own books and their books were being lent out and their notes were being copied and their ears were going to be, you know, someone was going to be bequeathed these books.
You know, it's interesting, and I normally don't,
I think it's necessary to quote a blurb on a book, but Tony Grafton's, on your book, I think is pertinent in that you basically have kind of, this field belongs to you.
Yes, the marginalia lady.
Well, I'm giving it up.
Are you really?
It's open to other people now.
No kidding.
And the new book is forthcoming, is that correct?
Yes, it is.
It's called Romantic Readers.
Uh-huh.
and could you tell me a little bit about it uh is it is it a companion volume to to this one or does it kind of explore other areas it's a kind of sequel um i called it romantic readers colon the witness of martinelli and then the
the um marketing people made me change it don't they do that they do that yeah so it's the evidence they really want the word reader i know my my editors want reader in there and they want books and i've got it i said well what's wrong with every book it's reader i mean you have you have it right there and that's a famous library quote you know for one of the uh the five cardinal rules of a
library scientist, you know, and all the librarians seem to like it.
Anyway, that's a whole other story.
So you really feel, obviously, we can tell a lot about the reader by the books that, not only by the books that they read, but the comments that they write into the books.
Do you think also that we can know
We can learn great things about writers, or not just writers, but creative people just by knowing the books that they read by their libraries.
I think Henry James, Leonie Dell did a little monograph on how important Henry James' library was to him.
You think of Gibbon's library, and you point out that Gibbon really didn't annotate his books, but then you do have that one extraordinary book where he did, that one history, that Greek history.
But is it enough to know something about the person by knowing they're reading?
Or do you have to have, you think, either a commonplace book or a marginalia to kind of get at the creative process?
Well, I think you're right.
It sounds as though you don't think the library list is good enough, and I don't either.
Nobody who owns books would think that.
Right.
So I think you have to work with what evidence you've got, and the people who write about Emily Dickinson will take the evidence of a dog-eared book in the family collection, telling them something about her because they need to have so little to go on.
Coleridge is a really interesting case because we do have a list to some extent of e-books.
There is a library's tale catalog, although there are some problems about it.
And people have been working on his library's collection for a long time.
The books that were really important to him, the ones that he really assimilated, are not in that collection.
So you can work backwards from the works and from allusions and quotations in the works to infer something not only about what the person read, but about how deep it went with.
You know, when you think of a library list, it can't be enough.
And I think to go to the other extreme, the Library of Congress has, what, 17,000 books from Adolf Hitler's library?
Right.
You know?
Did he read them?
Did he read any of them?
And I guess a few of them have a few markings on them.
So many of them were given to him, too, I mean, by sycophants or whatever.
Right.
So what does that tell you, I guess, Breonna?
I wonder.
Right.
I guess that's for a whole next generation of scholars to figure out.
It is a developing discipline, though, the history of reading, I can think.
It looks like it.
I don't know quite how it's going to turn out.
The connection between my last book and the next one is that I thought, the first one was in honor study, and I thought what I was doing was opening up the
We're contributing, because other people, particularly Grafton and some other Renaissance scholars, but contributing to the opening up of an order of document which people ought to be glad to get hold of, you know, that they ought to see the potential value of this for historical studies of all sorts.
And the book was very nicely received.
People seemed to enjoy it and it was well-reviewed and so on.
But there was a complete silence on the part of the historians, who were the people I thought would be particularly interested.
So I thought even historians of reading.
Do I believe the people, do you think, that group?
They're more interested in dissemination and in distribution and in influence.
It's funny you should say that, because I'm trying to write into this book, The French Revolution, and I love Dines.
I don't mean to denigrate it in any way, but the Revolution in print book, which is the press in French, it's going to be loaded with stuff, and it's not.
It's not the thing I'm reading at all.
It's the stuff that was there and how we track it and follow it, but I mean, this whole question of how did the book influence the French Revolution, I haven't
I still haven't gotten to that yet.
I still haven't found anything.
I'm sure there must be things out there that are going to tell me that, but I can't find them just yet.
And I don't find that in the Histoire du livre studies at all.
I think that in particular is something that was always said at the time, that Rousseau particularly, and the Encyclopédie...
caused the French Revolution to happen, and that what historians are finding now is that that was certainly an overstatement, and therefore there's a kind of embarrassment about it.
Also, you know, it is hard to influence.
Influence is very hard to trace.
William Sinclair's new book tries to do it.
Which book is that?
It's called The Reading Nation in the Romantic Period.
Oh, okay.
It's a very important, terrific book.
Who publishes it?
Cambridge.
It's a big book.
It's stuffed with useful information.
It's provocative.
It's going to make everybody who reads it mad.
It's just out?
Sorry?
July.
Can you just tell me the title once more, please?
It's The Reading Nation in the Romantic Period.
Okay, good.
You'll like it.
I'll get right on it.
But he doesn't do a lot with individual readers.
He does a bit, but not a lot with individual readers.
But he struggles with the documenting of influence.
Very hard to do.
We haven't really got a good method yet.
So you say you're leaving the field.
Well, I was sort of halfway through the genesis of the second book, which, because the historians didn't seem to be interested, I thought I would give it one more shot and try to write a history, something that was historically narrow.
So I would take marginalia,
for a short period and see what I could do with it from the point of view of history of reading.
So that's what this one is.
It's written in books in Britain between the 1790s and about 1830s.
So we'll see what happens.
You suggest this in the book.
You really don't discover this stuff until someone physically goes into the books to see if it's there.
And while you do regard this as manuscript material, and I think rightfully so is manuscript material, it's been out in the file.
It hasn't been cataloged anywhere.
You have the books, but until someone, a reader, a scholar, goes in to...
to look at these books, you don't discover this stuff.
I mean, stuff can sit around waiting for generations before anyone... That is kind of interesting, isn't it?
And not terribly scientific, either.
It's like awaiting discovery.
And I guess you've looked at thousands of annotated books right now.
Do you have a rough idea of how many you think you've looked at over there?
Well, probably about 3,000.
That is a 2003 book, but there was some overlap.
Wow.
You must have some favorites in your own collection.
Of course, right.
People are usually interested to be in marginally association items, so they want to know who wrote them, and if it's an important person, then they're important.
But I was really interested in ones in which we don't know who wrote them or the person is not of any significance.
And you do mention you have the Osborne collection up there in Toronto, and so you're actually able to see what kids wrote.
Yes.
And I'm thinking now you have the Ruth Baldwin collection down in Florida, which is like 120,000 books.
And what she really, I wrote about her in Gentle Madness, which she loved were books that were used, that had been used.
You know, the whole idea of getting a pristine book.
Well, he was an athlete who wants a book that's, you know, I mean, it just runs against the antiquarian grain, right?
The more pristine the book is, the better people like it, supposedly.
She wanted books that showed use, you know, books that had little sticky fingers for the chocolate or the jam.
Kids wrote something in there.
There are like 120,000 of these books there.
I remember going down there and just picking up random little things, a gift from a teacher, a grandmother who writes a little note, and you really do kind of get a nice little sense of things.
I know when my first book was published in 1995, I bought it at the Cranbrook New England Writers at Home or something like that.
What I liked about it, it was a hundred and something years old.
And I got it from a bookseller down in Austin, but it had been inscribed from one grandfather to his daughter, and the daughter gave it to someone else, and then each went writing a nice little inscription.
And then it hadn't been written in for like 80 or 90 years until I bought it.
And then I bought it and I gave it to my wife on her birthday, which also happened to be the publication date for the first book.
And she said, don't write in that.
You're going to mess.
I said, oh, sweetie, I'm not messing it up at all.
This is nice.
This is a little history to the book that, you know, I think there's a little bit of context and a little bit of message in there.
But I love writing across these books where people have written it.
And as you point out, it has just become, I suppose libraries have had a lot to do with this.
They've had everything to do with it, but you shouldn't be writing in books.
I mean, you take an oath at the Broadleian, right?
Right, yeah.
You'll go to hell if you write.
Yeah.
And I'm sure you've probably had to take that oath if you've read at the Broadleian.
Absolutely.
But you feel that if these are our books and they have no other great associative...
are antiquated value, we should be writing in them.
Absolutely, yes.
And until about, I don't know, 1840 perhaps, I think the norm was rather the other way around.
What we think, I think, you should correct me on the wrong, is that most people have been properly brought up and they don't write in books, not in any books.
but that a few people do write in books, and those sinners are habitual sinners, and they do it everywhere.
There's no stopping them.
They can't help themselves pray.
Other people's books.
Yes, other people's library books.
But in the past, up until about 1830, I think the norm was exactly the opposite.
That is that most people wrote in their books, but nobody did it habitually.
So that you did it for a good reason.
So that's good from our standpoint then, isn't it?
Because if it was for a good reason, we might usually find something.
Can you think of any of the great epiphanies that you've had, things that you've run across?
I guess we mentioned the student was the first one.
They kind of got you going.
Any other things that you went across and you said, wow, this is fabulous.
It's really, you know, the light goes off over your head.
You see something or some sort of a link is made.
Can you just think of anything offhand that has really decided you like that?
I would have thought, and you must know this experience as well, that it actually happens fairly often.
When you're dealing with material that other people haven't handled, it's sometimes an illusion.
that if you're dealing with material that other people haven't handled, then suddenly a light goes on.
For instance, Mrs. Piazzi.
I really take to her as a writer in the margins of books.
So whenever I get one of her books, it adds something to my sort of growing profile of Mrs. Piazzi.
I think she was a really fascinating person.
But then...
Then there was a time when I was getting some little books.
You know, Robin Alston did a catalog of books with manuscripts in the British Library, and he was just taking things out of the electronic record that were recorded as having manuscript elements.
So I was following those to find as many as I could annotated in the romantic period.
And I began, quite often what happens is that
Although no name is attached, there is in fact a name in the book, because people who are going to write in books usually put their name in first, and then they write in books, and you can match the hands.
So quite often, even though the catalogers haven't identified the annotator, the ownership inscription don't identify the annotator, and I realized
that I was getting quite a lot of books, little, crummy little books, but really crammed with notes by an intelligent and interesting reader whose name was Philip McTermott, and he was a physician in Dublin.
And so I asked the archivist at the library whether they had any provenance records for these books.
And I had a little group of them.
And they did.
They produced the original list from about 1866 in which they were offered about, I don't know, 500 titles and bought about 200 for 11 pounds because they were reading crummy little books.
And so I began calling them up.
They were there in the collection, the ones that they had bought.
And sure enough, they had MacDermott's notes in them.
M-C-D-E-R-M-O-T-T?
M-A-C.
D-E-R-M-O-T-T.
Not necessarily the Irish Mac.
It's M-A-C, right?
He is M-A-C.
Yeah, okay, good.
Interesting.
He must have studied in London and then in Edinburgh and then gone back to Dublin.
Or the time that I began in the British Library, they had a bunch of volumes, I think 11 of them, of
a collection of Regency satirical poems, little poems about 30 pages long.
And they all have notes in them.
And I realized gradually that these notes were all in the same hand and that someone was, someone in the period realizing that these were topical and that the
the reasons for the, or the meaning of the poems was going to be lost, wrote in little explanations.
And then one day I was able to find out who he had been.
So, you know, there are those kinds of lights that come on.
Or, one last example, William Beckford.
You must know Beckford.
Yes, he's the...
Somebody, I guess, said he lived a worthless life or a useless life, but he was really quite a collector, and as you point out, also quite a writer of marginality, I guess.
That's fantastic.
But he did it in a very unusual way.
I mean, usually, when I look at Tillridge or Keats or Blake in the context of what their contemporaries were doing with their books, I can see that they're doing the same thing that many other people were doing.
Right.
And that's another kind of revelation to realize what it is that Blake was doing when he wrote in his books.
He wasn't just venting.
Or king.
But Beckford, I don't know anybody else who did what Beckford does.
And Blake was, you said he wasn't venting.
What was Blake?
Someone like Blake doing?
Blake's one of my great heroes, I have to say.
Yes, mine too.
Wonderful.
The guy teaches himself languages so he can illustrate the original.
How many people do that?
Yes, a real obsession.
Yes, just really wonderful.
Wonderful man.
You use the phrase, you call people like Erasmus and Montaigne and John Dee and I guess Voltaire would...
apply assured readers.
Do you have a hierarchical system for categorizing readers?
I think you call assured.
I'd like to phrase it.
Possibly.
I agree with that.
What is an assured reader?
I wonder.
ASSURED assured.
I mean, you must know them when you see them, I guess, as they say.
What's the difference between pornography and erotica, you know, when you see it?
I guess.
I mean, I'm just being silly here at this point.
Well, Blake would certainly be in a short release.
I think that what he was doing was pursuing an alternative method of publication.
Really?
Mm-hmm.
That's wonderful.
Yeah, that's such a great little insight.
When Catherine the Great buys Voltaire's library, and of course he was one of the... He was, yeah.
I mean, it's not just getting his books, you really are getting a piece of him, aren't you?
Yeah.
And have you had a chance to look at any of his books?
No, I haven't.
I've been doing British readers.
But of course, a lot of Voltaire's marginalia are published.
And the French do it in that rather interesting way.
That is, they bring out an edition of the works, and then they include interesting, or notes by interesting readers among the footnotes.
So that you get Voltaire's comment on leader or whatever it is, as well as
Baudelaire or, you know, somebody else.
You don't know if there are any English editions of this stuff.
Well, as well, they're pretty much in French.
Pretty much in French.
That's not going to help me too much.
You mentioned Emily Dickinson's scholars.
Now, have they been trying to determine her?
Are there some pretty good essays or books that you can suggest about Dickinson's?
That's in the first book.
So you can check it out there.
Which one, I'm sorry, was it?
It's in Marginalia.
Okay.
There's not very much, and it's very tenuous.
But it is of great concern, trying to determine what she read, who she was, this recluse, so to speak.
Where was all this stuff coming from?
We have so much of a correspondence, so we know it couldn't have all been coming from there.
And then you have somebody like Emerson, where they have his borrowing records, like at Harvard or even at Boston S&AM.
So you know books that he actually went to get, but he didn't write in them, so to speak.
Did he keep notebooks?
That would be the next question, right?
He did keep notebooks.
And I guess the notebooks don't work for you.
It has to be in the print book, right?
Yeah.
And, of course, this is a tradition that goes back even earlier than the printed book.
I mean, even in the old manuscript books.
Certainly.
But for you, it's the printed book because this is a whole different calculus going on, isn't it?
Once it's print and it's reaching a wider audience.
It is, for you, print, right?
Well, um...
Yes and no, because the traditions carry over.
So the kinds of people who write at random in the margins of books, or at least not so much, I know maybe children, but grown-up educated readers,
Indeed, they don't need to be formally educated.
Literate people, when they write in the margins of books, usually fall into one category or other.
And there are some kinds of notes, like glosses, you know, the meanings of words that you don't understand.
Those go right back through the manuscripts when they continue to today.
Other kinds die out.
There are a couple in the Romantic period that are really completely mystified.
There are so many living authors who, Harold Bloom, for instance, his library of 25,000 or so books are going to an institution in Vermont.
And when I spoke to Harold, and he actually credited your book.
He said, now, after reading Professor Jackson's book, he said, it's okay to write in my book.
I said, Harold, I wish you'd been doing it for the last 50 years, you know.
Then you have Susan Sontag's library out at UCLA, I guess.
And then there are just multiple examples of, I think, Margaret Atwood's books at Toronto, I think.
So does any of this, especially of living writers or recent contemporary writers, does this interest you at all?
It interests me, but I'm not going to be writing about it.
Northrop Frye's books are here at Toronto.
Those are terrific.
notes in them, and they've kept the annotated books separate so that you can go and pull them off the shelf and see what's there.
Iris Murdoch's books just went, just were sold.
Actually, I don't remember what happened to them.
Did you?
They were sold, yeah, and I'll have to check it out.
I'll know.
Those were said to have, and I would expect them to have very
Qualsome notes in the market.
Critical notes.
I hope it went off as a collection.
I think it did.
I'll check it out.
I've never seen something on it and then I didn't follow up on it.
I don't know.
They didn't go to auction, did they?
Or was it done, you think, privately?
I think they went.
Don't remember, I may be able to, I think I have a file into which I drop these things and I may be able to send you it.
Well, if you have it, I can probably find it.
I'm sure it's a LexisNexis will turn it up or something like that.
What was that, LexisNexis?
No, what is that?
Oh, LexisNexis is unbelievable.
At University, I'm sure I have it.
It's this database of billions of news stories in the last 20 years.
that you can just put in your little, and it's not just news in the newspapers, but journals and magazines.
This is really my, I didn't have this available to me for the first two books, but it's amazing what you can do.
Just searching for stories.
And then obviously you have to go to the next level one and get the backup on it.
But I do a pretty quick search and find out what it is.
Is that L-E-X-U-S?
L-E-X-I-S.
Nexus.
Oh, yes, right.
Of course.
and uh and there's an academic universe, one which every institution has and it's wonderful if you have an academic account because for someone like me, it's three bucks every time I download this story. Oh i go to clark and holy cross here in Worcester, where they uh give me privileges which is just terrific.
I think, let me just take a quick look at the notes.
What I'd like to do is to transcribe this and send you a copy.
I'll let you take a look at it and see if there's anything you'd like to add or whatever.
Okay.
And then if we could follow up if that's okay with you.
Sure.
I think of what I'd like to do.
Are you familiar with the collection of books about Bernie Rosenthal sent to Yale?
Yes.
I use that in the original book.
And, of course, they published a wonderful catalog of it with facsimiles.
Exactly.
So you can use it with students.
It's marvelous.
That's a wonderful book.
I think we've covered a lot here.
And...
I think what I'd like to do is just transcribe this.
You mentioned Gladstone's books are kind of a disappointment for you.
Yes.
I haven't actually seen very many of them because I didn't go to Wales.
But I've seen a few and, you know, you can, with someone who is a systematic marker up of books, you can tell a good deal from Marx's teachings.
Marginalia are mostly just marks.
People have done a lot with those, although there are also a few brilliant notes.
And the reason I mention it is because he is a case where you can be a great reader, but not necessarily a great writer.
Or Virginia Woolf.
Or Virginia Woolf, precisely.
You could be a fabulous reader.
I don't know how much Johnson wrote in his book either, for that matter.
There are a number that survived, but I don't think there are that many, right?
No, that's right.
That's what I mean about...
writing infrequently, but on special occasions.
Johnson used to use books, too, as he marked them up for the dictionary, so that's kind of professional use.
Right, and then, of course, they went back to the people who loaned them, and they said they were ruined.
God, but they didn't know, right?
But he also did write...
For Carl Spalman, for instance, he annotated one of her books and gave it back to her so that this is, I think, the most interesting use of marginalia is to see one reader deliberately writing in a book as a guide to another so that the two of them will be able over distance to read it together.
That's wonderful.
Yes, that's great stuff.
So your new book is coming in March?
In the spring, I don't know exactly.
In the spring, good.
Well, I'll make sure I get a copy of it, and it'll be plenty of time to get a look at it.
I'm going to be coming down to Boston in February to give a lecture at the Boston Public Library about, in fact, about Adams of March.
Do you know the date?
February the 16th.
I'll be there.
Oh, great.
I wouldn't miss it.
Thanks, I'll be here the whole month of February.
Terrific.
So that would be fabulous.
Well, I think I'll let you go, Professor.
Thanks so much for agreeing to do this on such short notice.
I'm leaving on a trip Wednesday, having gone for 10 days, but I'll take my tape recorder with me and my computer.
So I should have this transcribed within the next week or so, and I'll send it to you as an attachment on an email, and you can take a look at it.
It'll be long.
It'll be like 15 or 16 or whatever single-space type written pages.
But as you understand, I won't be using the whole thing.
But if there's anything that bothers you or that you want to correct or that you want to add to, I encourage you to do it.
Good.
You will have to call me Heather.
I will do that.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you so much.
Pleasure.
You take care.
You too.
Bye-bye.